add chraka ui hidden treasures page (#4)
navarroaxel/navarroaxel.github.io: blog/chakra-ui-the-hidden-treasures.md

# Chakra UI: the hidden treasures

I found [Chakra UI](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui) (by [Segun](https://github.com/readme/segun-adebayo)) a few months ago, and I learned a lot of things from it.

I've been coding in React since 2017, and I used Less, Sass, styles-components, even StyleSheet in `react-native`. But this time I found something more fluent.

## A little Introduction

> If you used `styled-components`, Chakra UI moved all the CSS strings to props, like the following `Box`, a `div` wrapper:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have you ever used `styled-components`? Chakra UI moved all the CSS strings to props, like the following `Box`, a `div` wrapper:
```

```jsx
<Box height={4} width="20rem" bg="blue.100" />
```

And this is awesome. 🤩

Also the default theme is flexible and you can overwrite whatever you want, and also create custom components to extend the built-in Chakra components.

And if you are a TypeScript lover: the types are very consistent.

But this post is not an introduction...

> ## But where is the treasure?

Reviewer: _But_ twice?

> Like every treasure, this is not in the surface, you need to go deep. I cloned the source code of Chakra UI and I found a lot of stuff.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like every treasure, this one is not in the surface and you'll need to go deep. I cloned the source code of Chakra UI and I found a lot of stuff.
```

### The project structure

> Chakra is built using packages for each module 👌, some are internals, others are public and exported by the main package [@chakra-ui/react](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@chakra-ui/react). You can learn how to use `lerna` and how build this system package by package. 📦

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chakra is built using packages for each module 👌; some are internals and others are public and exported by the main package [@chakra-ui/react](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@chakra-ui/react). You can learn how to use `lerna` and  how to build this system package by package. 📦
```

Reviewer: I admit the `;` is a bit questionable.

### The hooks

> The first package I try to looked into was the [@chakra-ui/hooks](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/tree/main/packages/hooks) and I found the first treasures:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first package I looked into was the [@chakra-ui/hooks](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/tree/main/packages/hooks) and I found the first treasure:
```

> The [useOutsideClick](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/hooks/use-outside-click), a common one to hide popovers when the user clicks outside them. And then the [useMergeRefs](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/hooks/use-merge-refs) when you need to merge several react refs into one. I contributed with doc pages for both hooks. 😁 You can find more [useful](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/hooks/src/use-const.ts) [hooks](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/hooks/src/use-why-update.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [useOutsideClick](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/hooks/use-outside-click) is a common one to hide popovers when the user clicks outside them. And then there is the [useMergeRefs](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/hooks/use-merge-refs) when you need to merge several react refs into one. I contributed with doc pages for both hooks. 😁

You can find more [useful](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/hooks/src/use-const.ts) [hooks](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/hooks/src/use-why-update.ts).
```

Like this special one: the [usePopper](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/popper/README.md), a wrapper for the [popper.js](https://popper.js.org/) 🍿 library, converting it into a magic hook. This is an internal hook and it's not documented in the website, but is still exported and you can use it, but ⚠️ it's not covered by [semver](https://semver.org/). 🙀

### The utils

Another internal package is the [@chakra-ui/utils](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/tree/main/packages/utils).

> You can find functions for [arrays](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/array.ts) that remembers to the Lodash library. Also to manage [functions](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/function.ts) and parse [numbers](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/number.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here you can find functions for [arrays](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/array.ts) that remembers to the Lodash library. Also to manage [functions](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/function.ts) and parse [numbers](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/number.ts).
```

> Another one to work with [objects](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/object.ts) with [`lodash.mergewith`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/lodash.mergewith) as a dependency.

Reviewer: Which one are you referring to here?

You can use [`addDomEvent`](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/dom.ts#L41) to add global event listeners without leaks.

```jsx
import {addDomEvent} from '@chakra-ui/utils';

const MyNiceFeature = () => {
  const [height, setHeight] = useState(window.innerHeight - 50);
  useEffect(
    () =>
      addDomEvent(window, 'resize', () =>
        setHeight(window.innerHeight - 50),
      ),
    [],
  );
  ...
};
```

If this helpers are already loaded in your bundle, what if you don't repeat the code and you reuse this in your React app code.

### The React code

> I found myself reading the code by [Sage](https://github.com/readme/segun-adebayo) and the contributors and learning another way to handle heavy UI components, like the [@chakra-ui/menu](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/tree/main/packages/menu). Using hooks and event handlers to handle the user interactions in a fluent way. 🤯

Reviewer: Maybe it has to do with that I don't know what Sage is o exactly what are you talking about, but this paragraph seems a bit confusing to me.

## Conclusion

> I found a nice and beauty UI library where I can handle CSS inside the React components without string templates. But also I found a source for learn new stuff:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I found a nice and beauty UI library where I can handle CSS inside the React components without string templates. But I also found a source for learning new stuff:
```

* How to handle UI behavior with reusable hooks and functions.
* A hidden toolbox that I can use for my own components too.

> * And a guideline to pass from `px` to `rem` units in CSS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A guideline to pass from `px` to `rem` units in CSS.
```

> I hope you fall in love with Chakra UI too. 🥰 And the power of the Open Source Software. *#ShareTheKnowledge*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I hope you fall in love with Chakra UI too and the power of the Open Source Software. 🥰
*#ShareTheKnowledge*
```

# Chakra UI: the hidden treasures

I found [Chakra UI](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui) (by [Sage](https://github.com/readme/segun-adebayo)) a few months ago, and I learned a lot of things from it.

I've been coding in React since 2017, and I used Less, Sass, `styled-components`, even StyleSheet in `react-native`. But this time I found something more fluent.

## A little Introduction

Have you ever used `styled-components`? Chakra UI moved all the CSS strings to props, like the following `Box`, a `div` wrapper:

```jsx
<Box height={4} width="20rem" bg="blue.100" />
```

And this is awesome. 🤩

Also the default theme is flexible and you can overwrite whatever you want, and also create custom components to extend the built-in Chakra components.

And if you are a TypeScript lover: the types are very consistent.

But this post is not an introduction...

## And where is the treasure?

> Like every treasure, this one is not in the surface and you'll need to go deep. I cloned the source code of Chakra UI and I found a lot of stuff.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like every treasure, this one is not in the surface, you'll need to go deeper. I cloned the source code of Chakra UI and I found a lot of stuff.
```

### The project structure

Chakra is built using packages for each module 👌; some are internals and others are public and exported by the main package [@chakra-ui/react](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@chakra-ui/react). You can learn how to use `lerna` and how to build this system package by package. 📦

### The hooks

The first package I dove into was the [@chakra-ui/hooks](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/tree/main/packages/hooks) and I found the first treasure:

> The [useOutsideClick](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/hooks/use-outside-click) is a common one to hide popovers when the user clicks outside them. And then there is the [useMergeRefs](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/hooks/use-merge-refs) when you need to merge several react refs into one. I contributed with doc pages for both hooks. 😁

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [useOutsideClick](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/hooks/use-outside-click) is a common one to hide popovers when the user clicks outside them. And then there is the [useMergeRefs](https://chakra-ui.com/docs/hooks/use-merge-refs) when you need to merge several React refs into one. I contributed with doc pages for both hooks. 😁
```

You can find more [useful](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/hooks/src/use-const.ts) [hooks](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/hooks/src/use-why-update.ts).

> Like this special one: the [usePopper](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/popper/README.md), a wrapper for the [popper.js](https://popper.js.org/) 🍿 library, converting it into a magic hook. This is an internal hook and it's not documented in the website, but is still exported and you can use it, but ⚠️ it's not covered by [semver](https://semver.org/). 🙀

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like this special one: the [usePopper](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/popper/README.md), a wrapper for the [popper.js](https://popper.js.org/) 🍿 library, converting it into a magic hook. This is an internal hook and it's not documented in the website, but is still exported and you can use it, the downside is that ⚠️ it's not covered by [semver](https://semver.org/). 🙀
```
Just not to repeat two "but" one after the other

### The utils

Another internal package is the [@chakra-ui/utils](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/tree/main/packages/utils).

Here you can find functions for [arrays](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/array.ts) that remembers to the Lodash library. Also to manage [functions](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/function.ts) and parse [numbers](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/number.ts).

Another one to work with [objects](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/object.ts) with [`lodash.mergewith`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/lodash.mergewith) as a dependency.

You can use [`addDomEvent`](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/blob/main/packages/utils/src/dom.ts#L41) to add global event listeners without leaks.

```jsx
import {addDomEvent} from '@chakra-ui/utils';

const MyNiceFeature = () => {
  const [height, setHeight] = useState(window.innerHeight - 50);
  useEffect(
    () =>
      addDomEvent(window, 'resize', () =>
        setHeight(window.innerHeight - 50),
      ),
    [],
  );
  ...
};
```

> If this helpers are already loaded in your bundle, what if you don't repeat the code and you reuse this in your React app code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If these helpers are already loaded in your bundle, why would you repeat the code instead of reusing it?
```

### The React code

I found myself reading the code by [Sage](https://github.com/readme/segun-adebayo) and the contributors and learning another way to handle heavy UI components, like the [@chakra-ui/menu](https://github.com/chakra-ui/chakra-ui/tree/main/packages/menu). Using hooks and event handlers to handle the user interactions in a fluent way. 🤯

## Conclusion

I found a nice and beautiful UI library where I can handle CSS inside the React components without string templates. But I also found a source to learn new stuff:

* How to handle UI behavior with reusable hooks and functions.
* A hidden toolbox that I can use for my own components too.
* The path to use Lerna in a monorepo.
* A guideline to pass from `px` to `rem` units in CSS.

Cons

* Some tweaks that you'll need to customize the theme is not explicitly documented.
* The community is growing but not so big like `styled-components.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The documentation is a work in progress, there are some functionalities that you'll have to understand by reading the source code.

```
Just my thought.
